README.md, before:

# Graphical representation of a STAN-model

This tool generates and visualizes dependency graphs from a Stan model file. 
The tool uses Graphviz to create graphical representations of the dependencies within a Stan model, supporting features like label customization and verbosity control.

The goal is currently not to make a 100% perfect graphical rendition of a STAN model, but to make a shortcut of the first 90%.

# Quick start
Currently, you run the python script from repository directory (or any location you move it to) as a script, no further installation required. 

In order to generate the graph of the STAN-model, run:
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py path/to/file.stan
```
executing the generated script. 

The resulting generated files are:
- a .dot file containing the code for generating a graph using graphviz
- a .png from running the dot file though graphviz


## Features

- **Graph Rendering**: Automatically generates a dependency graph from a Stan model file, showing the relationships between parameters and data.
- **Custom Labels**: Supports custom labeling of nodes using a label mapping file. This allows for LaTeX-style symbols or any other custom labels.
- **Verbosity Control**: Provides a command-line flag to control the level of detail shown in the dependency graph. You can choose to display full functional dependencies or only the names of the distributions.
- **Flexible Output**: Generates both .dot files for further customization and .png images for easy visualization.

## Installation

Ensure you have the following installed on your system:

**Python**: Make sure Python is installed. The tool is compatible with Python 3.
**Graphviz**: Install Graphviz for rendering the graphs.
**dot2tex**: Install dot2tex if you need LaTeX support.

### Installing Dependencies

Use the following commands to install required dependencies:
```bash
sudo apt-get install graphviz          # Install Graphviz on Debian/Ubuntu
```
While not a strict dependency, it is recommended to install
```bash
pip install graphviz dot2tex           # Install the Python libraries
```
to leverage the tool with LaTeX for latex-style labeling. 

## Usage
Basic Command

To generate a dependency graph from a Stan model file:
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py [options] <stan_file>
```

# Command-Line Options

- -s, --squish: Squish out variables from the dependency tree. Multiple variables can be specified.Remember to terminate the list of variables to squish out with "--"
- -l, --labels: Specify the path to a label mapping file for custom node labels.
- -v, --verbose: Show full expressions for the dependencies (default is to show only the distribution names).
- -o, --output: Specify the base name for the output files (without extension)

## Example Commands

1. Generate a Graph with Default Labels
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py example_hierarchical_linreg_iris.stan
```

2. squish out variable "alpha" and "beta" from generated graph
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py -s alpha beta -- example_hierarchical_linreg_iris.stan
```
Note the termination of the list of variables indicated with `--`

3. Generate a Graph with Custom Labels
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py -l labels.txt example_hierarchical_linreg_iris.stan
```
Where labels.txt might look like:

```plaintext
alpha \alpha
beta \beta
sigma \sigma
```

Note here that graphviz have some limitations of rendering symbols, like latex syntax, and the labels should be represented in Unicode. 

4. Generate a Graph with Verbosity Control
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py -v example_hierarchical_linreg_iris.stan
```

## Output Files

- dependencies.dot: The generated .dot file representing the dependency graph.
- dependencies.png: The rendered image of the dependency graph.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Feel free to open an issue or submit a pull request with improvements or bug fixes.

Commit message:

corrected generation of rendered graph in terms of displaying distribution/expression for all nodes. Also added 'explicit' flag as -v now accounts for verbode output on command line

README.md, after:

# Graphical representation of a STAN-model

This tool generates and visualizes dependency graphs from a Stan model file. 
The tool uses Graphviz to create graphical representations of the dependencies within a Stan model, supporting features like label customization and verbosity control.

The goal is currently not to make a 100% perfect graphical rendition of a STAN model, but to make a shortcut of the first 90%.

# Quick start
Currently, you run the python script from repository directory (or any location you move it to) as a script, no further installation required. 

In order to generate the graph of the STAN-model, run:
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py path/to/file.stan
```
executing the generated script. 

The resulting generated files are:
- a .dot file containing the code for generating a graph using graphviz
- a .png from running the dot file though graphviz


## Features

- **Graph Rendering**: Automatically generates a dependency graph from a Stan model file, showing the relationships between parameters and data.
- **Custom Labels**: Supports custom labeling of nodes using a label mapping file. This allows for LaTeX-style symbols or any other custom labels.
- **Verbosity Control**: Provides a command-line flag to control the level of detail shown in the dependency graph. You can choose to display full functional dependencies or only the names of the distributions. Furthermore, you can control the verbosity of the rendering in the output. 
- **Flexible Output**: Generates both .dot files for further customization and .png images for easy visualization.

## Installation

Ensure you have the following installed on your system:

**Python**: Make sure Python is installed. The tool is compatible with Python 3.
**Graphviz**: Install Graphviz for rendering the graphs.
**dot2tex**: Install dot2tex if you need LaTeX support.

### Installing Dependencies

Use the following commands to install required dependencies:
```bash
sudo apt-get install graphviz          # Install Graphviz on Debian/Ubuntu
```
While not a strict dependency, it is recommended to install
```bash
pip install graphviz dot2tex           # Install the Python libraries
```
to leverage the tool with LaTeX for latex-style labeling. 

## Usage
Basic Command

To generate a dependency graph from a Stan model file:
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py [options] <stan_file>
```

# Command-Line Options
- -h, --help: help menu on the command line
- -s, --squish: Squish out variables from the dependency tree. Multiple variables can be specified.Remember to terminate the list of variables to squish out with "--"
- -l, --labels: Specify the path to a label mapping file for custom node labels.
- -e, --explicit: Show full expressions for the dependencies in arguments (default is to show only the distribution names).
- -v, --verbose: Show verbose output for graph rendering
- -o, --output: Specify the base name for the output files (without extension)

## Example Commands

1. Generate a Graph with Default Labels
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py example_hierarchical_linreg_iris.stan
```

2. squish out variable "alpha" and "beta" from generated graph
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py -s alpha beta -- example_hierarchical_linreg_iris.stan
```
Note the termination of the list of variables indicated with `--`

3. Generate a Graph with Custom Labels
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py -l labels.txt example_hierarchical_linreg_iris.stan
```
Where labels.txt might look like:

```plaintext
alpha \alpha
beta \beta
sigma \sigma
```

Note here that graphviz have some limitations of rendering symbols, like latex syntax, and the labels should be represented in Unicode. 

4. Generate a Graph with Verbosity Control
```bash
python3 graph_stan.py -v example_hierarchical_linreg_iris.stan
```

## Output Files

- dependencies.dot: The generated .dot file representing the dependency graph.
- dependencies.png: The rendered image of the dependency graph.

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Feel free to open an issue or submit a pull request with improvements or bug fixes.
